Introduction
 Python is a general purpose high level programming language.
 Python was developed by Guido Van Rossam in 1989 while working at National
Research Institute at Netherlands.
 But officially Python was made available to public in 1991. The official Date of Birth for
Python is : Feb 20th 1991.
 Python is recommended as first programming language for beginners.

Where we can use Python:
We can use everywhere. The most common important application areas are
1. For developing Desktop Applications
2. For developing web Applications
3. For developing database Applications
4. For Network Programming
5. For developing games
6. For Data Analysis Applications
7. For Machine Learning
8. For developing Artificial Intelligence Applications
9. For IOT

Features of Python:
1. Simple and easy to learn:
Python is a simple programming language. When we read Python program,we can feel like
reading english statements.
The syntaxes are very simple and only 30+ kerywords are available.
When compared with other languages, we can write programs with very less number of
lines. Hence more readability and simplicity.
We can reduce development and cost of the project.
2. Freeware and Open Source:
We can use Python software without any licence and it is freeware.
Its source code is open,so that we can we can customize based on our requirement.
Eg: Jython is customized version of Python to work with Java Applications.

3. High Level Programming language:
Python is high level programming language and hence it is programmer friendly language.
Being a programmer we are not required to concentrate low level activities like memory
management and security etc..
4. Platform Independent:
Once we write a Python program,it can run on any platform without rewriting once again.
Internally PVM is responsible to convert into machine understandable form.
5. Portability:
Python programs are portable. ie we can migrate from one platform to another platform
very easily. Python programs will provide same results on any paltform.
6. Dynamically Typed:
In Python we are not required to declare type for variables. Whenever we are assigning
the value, based on value, type will be allocated automatically.Hence Python is considered
as dynamically typed language.
But Java, C etc are Statically Typed Languages b'z we have to provide type at the beginning
only.
This dynamic typing nature will provide more flexibility to the programmer.
7. Both Procedure Oriented and Object Oriented:
Python language supports both Procedure oriented (like C, pascal etc) and object oriented
(like C++,Java) features. Hence we can get benefits of both like security and reusability etc
8. Interpreted:
We are not required to compile Python programs explcitly. Internally Python interpreter
will take care that compilation.
If compilation fails interpreter raised syntax errors. Once compilation success then PVM
(Python Virtual Machine) is responsible to execute.
9. Extensible:
We can use other language programs in Python.
The main advantages of this approach are:
1. We can use already existing legacy non-Python code
2. We can improve performance of the application
10. Embedded:
We can use Python programs in any other language programs.
i.e we can embedd Python programs anywhere.
11. Extensive Library:
Python has a rich inbuilt library.
Being a programmer we can use this library directly and we are not responsible to
implement the functionality.
etc...
Limitations of Python:
1. Performance wise not up to the mark b'z it is interpreted language.
2. Not using for mobile Applications

Identifier:
1. Alphabet Symbols (Either Upper case OR Lower case)
2. If Identifier is start with Underscore (_) then it indicates it is private.
3. Identifier should not start with Digits.
4. Identifiers are case sensitive.
5. We cannot use reserved words as identifiers
Eg: def=10 
6. There is no length limit for Python identifiers. But not recommended to use too lengthy
identifiers.
7. Dollor ($) Symbol is not allowed in Python.



Reserved Words
In Python some words are reserved to represent some meaning or functionality. Such type
of words are called Reserved words.
There are 35 reserved words available in Python.
 True,False,None
 and, or ,not,is
 if,elif,else
 while,for,break,continue,return,in,yield
 try,except,finally,raise,assert
 import,from,as,class,def,pass,global,nonlocal,lambda,del,with
Note:
1. All Reserved words in Python contain only alphabet symbols.
2. Except the following 3 reserved words, all contain only lower case alphabet symbols.
 True
 False
 None
Eg: a= true 
a=True √
>>> import keyword
>>> keyword.kwlist
['False', 'None', 'True', 'and', 'as', 'assert','await','async', 'break', 'class', 'continue', 'def', 'del', 'elif', 'else',
'except', 'finally', 'for', 'from', 'global', 'if', 'import', 'in', 'is', 'lambda', 'nonlocal', 'not', 'or',
'pass', 'raise', 'return', 'try', 'while', 'with', 'yield']


Data Types
Data Type represent the type of data present inside a variable.
In Python we are not required to specify the type explicitly. Based on value provided,the
type will be assigned automatically.Hence Python is Dynamically Typed Language.
Python contains the following inbuilt data types
1. int
2. float
3.complex
4.bool
5.str
6.bytes
7.bytearray
8.range
9.list
10.tuple
11.set
12.frozenset
13.dict
14.None

Note: Python contains several inbuilt functions
1.type()
to check the type of variable
2. id()
to get address of object

3. print()
to print the value
In Python everything is object

int data type:
We can use int data type to represent whole numbers (integral values)
Eg:
a=10
type(a) #int

float data type:
We can use float data type to represent floating point values (decimal values)
Eg: f=1.234
type(f) float

Complex Data Type:
A complex number is of the form
a + bj
j2 = -1
j =
Real Part Imaginary Part
a and b contain intergers or floating point values
Eg:
3+5j
10+5.5j
0.5+0.1j

4.bool data type:
We can use this data type to represent boolean values.
The only allowed values for this data type are:
True and False
Internally Python represents True as 1 and False as 0
b=True
type(b) =>bool
Eg:
a=10
b=20
c=a<b
print(c)==>True
True+True==>2
True-False==>1

str type:
str represents String data type.
A String is a sequence of characters enclosed within single quotes or double quotes.
s1='TREENETRA'
s1="TREENETRA"
By using single quotes or double quotes we cannot represent multi line string literals.
s1="TREENETRA"

For this requirement we should go for triple single quotes(''') or triple double quotes(""")
s1='''TREENETRA
EDUCATION'''
s1="""TREENETRA
EDUCATION"""
We can also use triple quotes to use single quote or double quote in our String.
''' This is " character'''
' This i " Character '
We can embed one string in another string
'''This "Python class very helpful" for java students'''

Slicing of Strings:
slice means a piece
[ ] operator is called slice operator,which can be used to retrieve parts of String.
In Python Strings follows zero based index.
The index can be either +ve or -ve.
+ve index means forward direction from Left to Right
-ve index means backward direction from Right to Left